data lake docs (#5609)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/use-cases/data_lake/getting-started/connecting-catalogs.md

This integration is currently only supported on AWS.
:::

### Configuring Unity in Databricks {#configuring-unity-in-databricks}

To allow ClickHouse to interact with the Unity catalog, you need to make sure the Unity Catalog is configured to allow interaction with an external reader. This can be achieved by following the[ "Enable external data access to Unity Catalog"](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/external-access/admin) guide.

In addition to enabling external access, ensure the principal configuring the integration has the `EXTERNAL USE SCHEMA` [privilege](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/external-access/admin#external-schema) on the schema containing the tables.

Once your catalog is configured, you must generate credentials for ClickHouse. Two different methods can be used, depending on your interaction mode with Unity:

* For Iceberg clients, use authentication as a [service principal](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/dev-tools/auth/oauth-m2m).

* For Delta clients, use a Personal Access Token ([PAT](https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/dev-tools/auth/pat)).

### Connect to the catalog {#connect-catalog}

> With the credentials, you can connect to the relevant endpoint to query the files in either Iceberg or Delta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the credentials, you can connect to the relevant endpoint to query the Iceberg or Delta tables.
```

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="iceberg" label="Iceberg" default>

```sql
SET allow_database_iceberg = 1;

CREATE DATABASE unity
ENGINE = DataLakeCatalog('https://<workspace-id>.cloud.databricks.com/api/2.1/unity-catalog/iceberg-rest')
SETTINGS catalog_type = 'rest', catalog_credential = '<client-id>:<client-secret>', warehouse = 'workspace',
oauth_server_uri = 'https://<workspace-id>.cloud.databricks.com/oidc/v1/token', auth_scope = 'all-apis,sql';
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### List tables {#list-tables}

Once the connection has been established to your catalog, you can list the tables.

```sql
SHOW TABLES FROM unity

┌─name───────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ unity.logs                                         │
│ unity.single_day_log                               │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

31 rows in set.
```

### Exploring table schemas {#exploring-table-schemas}

We can use the standard `SHOW CREATE TABLE` command.

:::note Backticks required
Note the need to specify the namespace and the table name, surrounded with backticks - ClickHouse doesn't support more than one namespace.
:::

> The following assumes querying the Rest iceberg catalog:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following assumes querying the REST iceberg catalog:
```
